LONG TERM FEATURES
    - Refresh price button on research and index that shows when last price was fetched.
    - Add seed transactions to create various mock users of different investment profiles

I will require the 'portfolio' data for the logged in user in at least 3 places in this app, but it's the most computationally expensive route in the api.

This is because it needs to process a user's entire transaction history and then process over it in multiple steps to handle things like 
    -group by company
    -drop closed positions
    -stock splits
    -cost basis. 
Any other route that is querying from a large set of datapoints is doing so in the sql engine on an indexed table so this portfolio calculation is unique. 

7/9/26
I initially considered making a different route that would serve my 'top/bottom' movers widget, but that seems like overkill and instead of doing 75+% of the computation and serving a subset of the portfolio data on a /top_bottom_movers route i'm going to just cache the calculation instead.

In python, once a module is imported it lives in memory for the lifetime of the process and is accessed via sys.modules.
Anything in the module scope or the class var scope is accessible through this globally within a given process.

This means I can use a class var to hold the 'user_holdings' state once computed and expose class methods to access and mutate it where needed throughout the app. logout(delete) transact(recalculate) fetch_holdings(read). 

This is "event-based cache invalidation". and will not be refreshed on a timer. Although, im realizing now that I cant just cache the finished user portfolio data because it will be invalidated by every price lookup. Instead i'll draw the cache boundary at stock_id: [qty, cost_basis, total_cost] and have the server re-compute the columns derived from current price live every time, but this will be much less expensive. 

An alternative is to expand my "balance_snapshots" system to hold the qty owned data required to calculate top and bottom movers. 

Either way, I need to nail down exactly what work balance snapshots and user holdings are doing to decide what to cache, when to update it, and who can read it.

7/10/26
THE PLAN!
    Goal: Get the 'screeners' to each render in their own frames. that goes card(scrollable table)
    
    Currently the screeners are rendering correctly. IF i remember correctly there's not much I 
can do to affect the screeners im getting from the api. This feels like a good opportunity
to make this backend better by just allowing a direct throughline from the screeners data source
and the api. Currently i arbitrarily cut off the data flow and pick a subset. And make my own
For now though, assuming im working with the fixed set of screeners.
I'm thinking I should examine the way the screener data is currently captured and investigate that.
    Q: What is the source of the data?
    A: it appears the "YahooQueryService" method "yq_screener_fetch_screeners()" is the source.
        This method makes an instance of the YahooQuery class "ticker"
        It then requests a list of screeners.
        Q: Can I improve this?
        A: Yes, expose the entire list of screeners at once from yq.
            screener.available_screeners
            Note: Be sure to time different qty's of data from the fetch

    Q: What is the shape that the database expects.
    Q: What is the path it takes to get there?
    A:
        1. Fetch Screeners
            - Call YQ.Ticker for screeners.
        2. Filter Screener data
            - Filters out screeners 
            under 50m market cap
            share price under a dollar
            pink slips and over the counter
            average daily volume below 200,000
            Does not appear to change the shape of the data.
        3. Extracts a custom "relative volume" screener.
            Q: From where?
            A: Filtered screeners, which is a list of companies which showed up in
            any of the screeners. The screeners come from the yq source as a
            dict with "screener name" as the key, and a dict of data about a company
            This dict isn't specific to the screener just associated via this 
            dict.
                Note: This means that exposing the entire dataset of screeners
                will also massively improve these 'custom' screeners who just take
                a subset of the total screeners available since we're only looking
                at a small portion of all companies that exist.
        4. Extracts screener "metadata"
            Q: What is that?
            A: This is simply the list of company tickers in each screener. 
            Q: What is it used for?
            A: In the "set_screeners_metadata" method of the APIDataIO() class.
                All metadata is deleted
                And replaced with the fresh set.
                Retrieving constructed 'quote' objects that are populated with data
                in the db. 
                Note: This is a big missed opportunity to just update the database.
                In my future yq_cache I would want to just keep this quote object
                as the central shape that a ticker is in. Currently it's pointlessly 
                complex and disparate. For now i need to just work with the current subset.
        5. Extracts a subset of the data that is relevant to the app, including constructing
        a 'price' module so the screener can be introduced into the 'tickers' table.
            Note: this has the effect of allowing users to see it in search bar and other stuff
            i cant be bothered to look into right now.
        6. Upserts all tickers from the screeners found into symbols table.
        7. Writes everything to the db.

        This pipeline is known as screener_data_update_orchestrator and is called at the
        start of each call to the /screeners route.

        Okay, at this point i've come to the conclusion that I could improve this pipeline 
        but in order to achieve the current goal of just exposing all the screeners instead
        of a tiny subset, all I need to do is 

        Q: Okay, its up to date, but how is the data read?
        A: get_screener_results()
            Selects the screeners whose names we want to read.
            WAIT! This is pointless, if anything I want the control
            system to be frontend asks for a subset of screeners as a 
            query parameter but there's no reason for this mechanism if I'm
            going to expose all yqs data. This is also the same list of screeners
            the write side is referencing so at least that's good. That means I could
            also just add every screener name to the codebase and that would allow me to remove some
            instead of just saying get all. 

    Okay, so after investigating the YahooQuery codebase with Claude's help, we were able to discover
    that the YahooQuery library is calling requests for the screeners literally. Meaning that, because of
    the implementation of yahoos API, we cant ask for many screeners at a time and have them returned in a shape
    approximating log time like with the Tickers class. We are tied to linear.
    I don't want to use threads to make parallel requests because I'm worried about getting blocked by this unpaid API.

    My idea to adapt to this by changing the internal finance-dashboard API structure.
    Currently we just hit /screeners and everything is sent back. 
    
    I propose that we use two endpoints, one to request the list of screeners we can ask for
    and use that to populate filtration controls.

    and a second endpoint that checks screener age, and only calls to refresh it when its over x age.

    This means that the screener name itself and not the 'metadata' involving the companies associated with the 
    screeners is all that we need.

    In order to implement this I need to 
        1. Remove the screener metadata table.
        2. Replace it with a table that has screener_name: age timestamp in the same format as the rest of the db.
            Call this screener ages.
        3. In the update orchestrator 
    wait.. shit this would mean that I need a different way to update my custom screeners too, because their updating
    was essentially a side effect of the bulk update process. 
    I think that I could instead change this screener to look at the database internally.
    This introduces either the risk of looking at stale data, or the complexity of checking if the data you're
    looking at is associated with valid screeners which would involve keeping the screener metadata table.
    I like this idea better though because it aligns more with the collect all data and then look within
    architecture that this is moving towards.
    Note: extract relative volumes needs to be renamed.
        Okay nevermind, so the new plan is ...
            1. Add a table that has screener_name: ages
                a. Include the custom screeners with this. 
                My issue now is, that if i let too many screeners get stale waiting for someone to look at them
                my custom screeners become less accurate. But if I have satan.py look at this screeners table and
                keep things up to date, im just moving the hangup from calling them all when i open screeners page.
                to a random request. And im not sure if that's any better behavior. I guess it would make the pause 
                smaller though. Like its only hitting for the screeners nobody is looking at vs all of them.
                so the more traffic, the less severe this effect. 
                I guess the question becomes is the complexity of this whole screener age system worth this?
                What is the benefit? Well the benefit is that we need this system to allow the user to redirect
                to our db instead of yahooquery.
                Okay so the extra complexity is exclusively that we're checking against the screener metadata to
                see if the stocks were looking at to construct our subset screeners are up to date.
                If we go for a background update against the screener age table that follows our codebase convention
                and has the effect that we can rely on the data.
                OKAY! so we DON'T need the screener metadata table after all?? Or wait, shit we do.
                because we need to use it to select the screeners from the db.


                Okay okay. So the final plan is
                Two routes: 
                    api/screeners/available
                        This route returns the list of screeners available so that the frontend can populate
                        a menu which shows the users their options.
                    api/screeners/screener?screener={str}
                        Checks for the age of the requested screener, and fetches if it's fresh.
                        If not, request from the yahooquery api for the screener in question. and 
                        feed it through the update screeners loop.
                        Note:
                            If a custom screener is selected we should redirect to a method that Extracts
                            the relevant data from the db internally instead of from the screeners incoming.

                        If the data is fresh, just get it from the internal db and don't call yq.


    After Class:
        Read about the 'factory pattern' and then review the utility of this implementation on
        lines 29-31 in the YahooQueryService.py module.

7/12:
    I want the final shape of this mechanism to serve the screeners route
    to be able to 
        1. Take a list of screeners to fetch
        2. Check which of these screeners are stale
        3. Pass the stale subset to the fetch, filter, upsert pipeline
            a. This pipeline needs to be able to recognize "custom screeners"
            if present, and update those afterwards.
            Note: i already have a method that extracts the bullish and bearish spikes
            just need to change the data source from the incoming datastream of fresh screeners
            to the database. Although... I could just keep it as is? No, that wont work
            because it needs to be able to get updated on an hourly basis like the others.
            So i guess the ideal is to just have it called at the end of the 'sweep' updates
            that daemon.py does, instead of being called from the standard update orchestrator.
            This means it will just be re-calculated every time the data is fresh.
            This means I should probably just ignore the age of these custom screeners.
            Will make the other parts of the pipeline simpler probably as well.
            Ill have a post processing step that's similar to the research insider Sentiment pattern.
            
        4. Serve the entire initial list from the db.
    The daemon.py will also be able to just call this list on every screener
    and all the fresh ones will be skipped automatically.
    This one method should work in both places.

    7/12:
        Goals:
            Have Daemon.py update screeners on an hourly cycle using the fresh_report 
            mechanism.
            Call the volume_spike_screeners method and other screeners who are derived
            from the yq screeners updating.
                1. Add last_screeners_update col to the global events table.
                2. Add screener lifecycle to update_frequencies enum.
                3. Add age check of screeners to run() function
                    - Potential break deriving each UpdateFrequency member's age into
                    functions
                4. Call screener pipeline if needed
                5. Call functions to derive and insert custom screeners,
                
            Write the api endpoints to return the valid options for screeners and put them
            in categories. 
            And to actually fetch, parse, upsert, and select the data and send it.

7/13:
    Today's goal:
        Consume the data from the new screeners route and render it on the frontend 
        My idea for this ux, because there's many categories with varying quantities of values.
            1. Each screener is a table in a tab group. selector will be color coded by section.
            2. The selection menu will be a series of checkbox type elements. 
                a. Imagining a series of squares or rectangles that have the name of a screener and will change color on select state.
                b. These rectangles will be under headings.
                c. there will be a search bar that filters out squares that aren't on the list.
            3. Once the screeners are selected they will be toggled by a file tree type system that will populate the left panel
                a. The left panel file tree system will allow up to n tabs to be toggled at any one time in the tab group.

            Before beginning I need to look at how to store this screener state so that once they're fetched once, they aren't re-fetched unless
            specifically requested to do so.
            So the requirements are:
                a. A central register of screener data. Organized as a key value pairs map. This is the shape it comes from the db in anyways.
                b. A method to expose refreshing all the data
                c. A method to add to the central register, update-inserting.

7/22:
    Today's: Goal:
        Implement concurrency via threading to allow "daemon" to run at the same time that requests are answered.
        Currently the app calls Daemon.run() at the teardown of every request context. This simulates having a background
        process crudely, but has the issue of causing routine requests for things like navigating to a new page, which should
        be quick, to hang, even on the local development server.
        
        For the duration of development up to this point I've been operating under the assumption that concurrency was 
        off the table because free hosting generally only allows one process. But of course, within one process we can
        have many threads, and it's very normal to use multi-threading to handle i/o tasks like fetching data from YQ, which
        is the common thing that causes the app to hang currently.

        The concerns with this are that I designed the entire application around the assumption that the data which the daemon handles
        will always be up to date when it is called upon, this is because prior to now, everything has been linear and synchronous.

        My current instinct is that the main sticking point will be the price data, but before I begin I will read further into the
        concurrent futures library, and I will remind myself exactly what data is currently being updated by this Daemon.py class.

        Goals for concurrent futures docs reading:
            - Learn more about the locking mechanism and find out how to handle the situation where user B makes a request 
            because the 'freshness' table said so, even though user A has already made the same request but just hasn't yet 
            updated the table due to the work being in progress.
            - Learn more about the implementation details and the limitations of the library in general.
            - Find at least one alternative library that can do the same thing.
                - On alternatives i read about threading library but it seems concurrent futures is just an
                easier to use interface for that, so I can skip it. As for asyncIO I feel like since some of the daemon tasks
                also require calculation I'll follow this nice sounding sentence I found on the internet.
                "threading is for working in parallel, and async is for waiting in parallel" and choose to not use asyncIO

        Data that Daemon.py currently updates:
            - Price updates (io)
            - global snapshots (io + calculation)
            - update screeners (io)
        
        I initially tried to just make a process pool executor instance every request but found 
        i don't need to do this. It seems currently that this isn't causing the daemon to run investigating why.

        according to an llm the issue with my current approach is that if I use the teardown to trigger a long running task than it will be 
        cut off when the context is destroyed. and if the context is preserved by force this will also just hang the app. It suggested i tried
        some sort of task scheduler.

        hmm maybe i should look at the simple threading library also. I just don't know of any way i could trigger my Daemon.py class to run other than the 
        teardown currently but obviously i need another option.

        I'm going to try just running an infinite loop outside any routes, i forgot you can do stuff like this globally in flask. I will allocate one thread to
        run daemon.run every 30 seconds.

        Okay im taking a break. i think im going to use "https://docs.python.org/3/library/threading.html#threading.Thread.daemon" when i come back

7/23:
    Today I will attempt to use the threading library with a "daemon" thread to run my Daemon.py on a loop in app.py. I'm doing this instead of
    threadpool manager because it should be less overhead, and I don't need to worry about cleaning up the threadpooler on shutdown. there
    may however be downsides I'm not aware of, but I guess I'll see when i get there.

    I've reminded myself that my dbmanager class already stores a db connection within the g object of an app context. These are typically scoped per 
    request, but can be made manually. The only question I have now is that I don't know where to establish this loop and context.

    I've decided to pivot entirely. Instead of running a thread on a loop within app.py, im deciding instead to create a route which exists to awaken the daemon and 
    run its tasks. This is advantageous because i can have parallel instances of the web server serving requests without parallel loops and threads which isn't what I want
    instead I will just hit this endpoint every x seconds from script that runs somewhere else.

    Today I also removed my login required decorator from the helpers.py script. I did this because it didn't check if any given user was logged in, only if any user was logged 
    in. This made it pretty pointless for security, and I wasn't sure of the benefit anyways. I believe this was a remnant of the cs50 days where this decorator was used as a 
    demonstration. Now that there's a class of internal routes a proper administration system is probably in order with different user classes. If I ever do this, I'll reintroduce 
    the login restriction for the routes then, but for now I just removed them.

8/1:
    Its been 7 whole days since I've done anything related to any software projects. This is the longest stretch I've had off in over a year, it feels strange. 
    Today I will be returning with the goal of integrating the newsAPI into this project.
    newsapi seems able to do two things
        1. Search news articles
        2. Return top headlines.
    This api will be useful for serving the homepage in combination with the existing system which just selects from the db for the most recent
    stories and shows those on the homepage. 

    Since I don't want to upset that mechanism, I think I'll just be trying to dump these new stories from the top_headlines endpoint into the db
    and let the existing system pick them out and mix them with whatever yahooquery is sending out too.

    I also want to integrate the search feature into the search bar so that users can see more than just news from yahoo.com as is the current state of things.

    The main issue I have is, how will I be able to tie the stories from newsAPI to specific symbols in the DB as the "newssymbols" table currently does.
    I'm thinking that unless they have the metadata available I won't be able to do this. Which I guess is fine because search will still work, and headlines will
    still appear on the homepage. I'll just be missing out on the research page showing stories related to any given ticker.
    I also want to mark top_headlines in a different way so they can be purged and refreshed on a n-ly basis.

    Goals:
        1. Integrate search endpoint into search
            - Will I store these stores anywhere, or no?
                - If a user searches a company, maybe yes? It will be hard to distinguish.
        2. Integrate top_headlines with the frontpage
            - How will I mark these to be purged / cache lifetime.
    
    Questions:
        Q: Does the api currently provide any info similar to "related tickers"?
        A: NO

        Q: How can I establish that a news item is from top_headlines, and how can I determine its age?
        A: In the newssymbols junction table I will set the symbol id to 0

        Q: How will I handle news API being down?
        A: I will simply search for "status" key of response and log and continue if status not ok.

8/2:
    Today im in seattle central library on 4th and seneca so I can pretend I have a job, i mean get out of the house.
    I've finished up implementing the method which handles requesting for and inserting today's top news stories as well as cleaning the
    database of all news stories over a week old.

    Today I'm focused on figuring out how to handle the search function. Currently my search bar just checks what exists in the database and pulls
    from that. But i want to integrate the newsAPI endpoint into this search bar too so there's a wider range of results.

    Currently the system has an offline news search and an online news search. The offline endpoint is used for the debouncing on the search bar
    and just uses sql queries to the db to find news stories that way, but the online search actually hits the api. Probably the simplest thing
    to do would be to just replace the current requests to yahooquery with requests to newsAPI, maybe YQ first and newsAPI second? my issue though
    is that there's not a ton of api budget for newsAPI and its important that I have requests available to call the get_headlines endpoint.

    This points to two things, caching the results of a user's news search and skipping requests to the API if there's already relevant results.
    My issue though is that it might be hard to tell in what case its best to request newsAPI again, and when its best to just serve what's in the db.

    This definitely adds some complexity and it might not actually be worth doing at the moment considering that I have no users.

    I'm thinking maybe the best plan is the modify the search online for news method to call the newsAPImanager method that calls the newsAPI search route
    until there's an error and then falls back to yahooquery search and then falls back to SQL on the db. I can then add yet another mechanism to the daemon
    which maybe will just poll the headlines to make sure those get grabbed every couple hours.

    So tasks are 
        1. Add a method to newsAPIManager that can call to the api with a specific query.
        2. Add a method to daemon that requests the existing news api manager method to fetch all business headlines fires once an hour or so.
            maybe once a day.
        3. Edit the search manager's news function > online function to waterfall from newsAPI > yahooquery > offline method.

8/3:
    Back at the Seattle central library today. After successfully completing my implementation of the newsAPI into the project, I'm fast approaching
    the end of the line for "version 1.0" (aka the only version). Just had a nice lunch with my friend at supreme dumplings.
    Today's goal is to implement the functionality of changing a password. This should be an interesting problem because I currently don't really have
    any sort of method of creating a "recovery question" or sending confirmation emails. I do think it would be quite impressive to do one or both of those
    things, but I'm not sure how. As of now, I think all this system would support without extension beyond the immediate feature is just changing password for
    people who can already authenticate their account (i.e. people who know their username and password.). The method of deployment for this project will be on A
    free tier web hosting service that has an ephemeral database that sets back to a pre-determined demo type state on spin up. For this reason it
    seems like this feature in and of itself may be a bit pointless but I feel like I want to add the option just for the sake of completeness. But if I'm doing that
    why not do it properly and add email auth?

    Q: What options do I have to implement an email authentication service? How complex would this be?
    A: Itsdangerous library, which is already part of the flask ecosystem

    I think this is really my only question because if I decide not to do this, I wont need to add any field associating emails with people's accounts,
    and the auth/change route will be as simple as a couple db queries. 

    My overall plan will be to use Itsdangerous as this is already a part of flask in the same way that jinja is.
    My initial goal will be to get reset links in the terminal, and then link to some free mail API. Time to read.

    The two key concepts to keep in mind here seem to be the "signature" and the "salt". The signature is a secret key stored with the environment
    variables that is used to hash "tokens". Tokens are composed of an account identifier, a timestamp, and the secret key. 

    Salt is used to differentiate the context in which these tokens are valid for authentication. For example pw changing vs account deletion ect.
    I'm still trying to figure out how the server should go about interpreting these tokens, but it seems the standard is to just have them 
    as path parameters and send the urls to users who can then make get requests with them to endpoints that will interpret the tokens. 
    
8/4:
    User Stories:
        "I can register for an account, optionally providing an email address."
            Backend Actions Required:
                - Check if username is valid
                - Check if username is in use
                - Check if password is valid
                - Check if email is in use
                - Write new user to DB

        "I can change my password if I know my current username and password."
            Backend Actions Required:
                - Check if username and password are both correct.
                - Change password in database remembering to hash the password.

        "I can change my password if I have access to my email address"
            Backend Actions Required:
                - Create signed token containing username. Using change_pw as salt.
                - Send token as part of a URL in an email to user.
                - Verify signed token is valid.
                - Receive GET request containing token which directs to "enter new password" form.
                - Change password in database remembering to hash the password.

        "I can verify my email address."
            Backend Actions Required:
                - Create signed token using verify_email as salt.
                - Verify signed token is valid.
                - Send token as part of a URL in an email to user.
                - Receive GET request containing token which redirects home.
                - Change "verified" state on user table

        "I can change the email address associated with my account."
            Backend Actions Required:
                - Create signed token using change_email as salt.
                - Verify signed token is valid.
                - Send token as part of a URL in an email to user.
                - Receive GET request containing token which redirects user home and removes email from their user table, sets email verified to false.
                - Change "email" state on user table row.

8/5:
    User clicks "I forgot password" 
        >
    Navigate to waiting page on frontend
        > 
    Internal request to route which generates token, and sends email
        > 
    Link is clicked
        > 
    Navigates to verification page which checks the token, and shows a form if valid
        >
    User Clicks Update email
        > 
    Internal request to update email route'
        > 
    Navigates to home on frontend

    User Clicks "Verify email"
        >
    Navigates to confirmation page on frontend
        > 
    Internal request to route which generates token and sends email
        >
    User clicks link in email
        >
    Navigates to confirmation page
        >
    Updates email verified bool to 1

8/12:
    I'm at the point where I currently have a working implementation of my pw email reset system and today I want to use similar
    infrastructure to establish a system for verifying emails after an account is created or afterwards. The only issue I'm thinking of is 
    what about when someone wants to change an email? Okay never mind they can only change email by the same method, a link from a token in an email.

    This means i need a route to request email verification, and a route to update the email status to verified. I also need to add a column to the
    db that will say whether or not the email is verified and check that before allowing a user to send a reset pw request to it.

    Todo:
        - Add field in db to flag email as verified or not - DONE
        - Add check in "forgot_pw" token generate route to check if email is verified, rejecting request if not. - DONE
        - Add a route to generate a token and send an email containing a link with the token to verify.
        - Add route to receive and validate the token and update the email and the verified status.
            - NOTE: the url will be directed to a page on the frontend via react router which will call this route.
    
    Later I will worry about the frontend stuff.

8/17:
    It has been a few days since I've properly been able to work on this project because of my job. Today I'm entering things with the assumption
    that the backend is in a completed state to support email authentication, and "forgot pw?" type resetting via emailing tokens to a verified
    address.

    Today I will focus on the frontend regardless of whether or not this prior assumption is true. This is the final feature I'm going to be addding
    prior to attempting to host this thing and show it to others for testing. As I want this to get done before college starts up, and I want to spend
    more time doing freelance work. Make no mistake however, this is still not in a finished state. I need to work on the colors, make whatever
    adjustments that people mention in testing, write tests for some of the important functions like transactions, make the demo database state,
    host the site, and make a writeup for the github. For now however, my goal for today is the following.

        1. Adapt the registration form to optionally allow users to add an email when signing up. - DONE
            Ended up adding a way to check emails are syntactically valid as well and integrated this into registration and email auth flows.
        2. Create a menu that allows user to request pw reset via email.
        3. Create a menu that allows users to request an email verification email.
        4. Create a menu, probably that is opened by clicking the user icon, that will hold this "security" sub menu
            and be a container for later potential account management options like changing a portfolio photo, or deleting account.
        5. Create a reset pw area that assumes the user already knows their current credentials.
        